Recent years have not been particularly good ones for those who toil on, rather than own, the means of production. Labour markets have made a slow and incomplete recovery from the trauma of the Great Recession. The crisis only briefly dislodged corporate profits as a share of GDP from historically high levels. Across much of the world, the share of national income flowing to labour has fallen over the past 40 years.
Taxing the rich in order to fund spending on the poor is a straightforward solution to inequality. But the well-heeled are adept to squeezing through tax loopholes, and at marshalling the political clout needed to chip away at high tax rates. Those frustrated by enduring levels of inequality are contemplating ever bolder ways to redress the lopsided balance between owners and workers.
In an ideal world, untrammelled markets would ensure that every firm and every worker earned precisely what they deserved. But as economists since Adam Smith have recognised, markets are inevitable distorted by the unequal distribution of power. As Smith wrote: "People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public."
The socialists of the 19th century reckoned that the best way to check the power of capital was collective ownership. Experiments with state management of the economy in the 20th century made the shortcomings of such systems horribly clear. In practice they tend to be violently coercive, and their inability to take advantage of the distributed knowledge of markets often produces a grinding stagnation.(China may have so far avoided  this outcome, but it has also signally failed to produce an equitable distribution of wealth.)
The market for ideas is, however, stocked with gentler, more practical leftism. Perhaps, for instance, the state could own a share of the economy's assets on behalf of the population. In a recent paper Matt Bruenig, a left-leaning writer, argues for the creation of an Ameriacn "social wealth fund". The fund, he says, should accumlate stakes in equity, bond and property markets, and then disburse a share of its investment income each year as a "universal basic dividend". Even in the most egalitarian decades of the past century, the richest 10% of the population owned the majority of the wealth. Money passes down the majority of the wealth. Money passes down the generations through gifts and bequests, but also through the extra educational and entrepreneurial oppotunities it affords. A social dividend would counteract this entrenchment of advantage.


